A sad and dirty Marseille in the rain, a dull Marseille, where the Dreyfus Affair and the last strikes seem to have tarnished the clear atmosphere…; the Santons fair , dear to Paul Arène, is itself in decadence; We can barely count, under the Allées, four or five huts of these good little figurines: the gods are leaving; horrible exhibitions replace them, anatomical museums and underwater monsters, and, without the enticing Provençal bonboneries (we pronounce bomb… onneries), one could believe oneself on the course of any city of the Center.

The animation, the gaiety, the crowd, the assent even are no longer there; so it is without regret that I see it sinking and falling at the back of the liner, this Marseille of December and disappointment, which, this time, appeared to me like an aged mistress, with an altered face that we no longer recognize; Marseille which I loved so much and which I am leaving almost with joy, as I left, three days ago, a Paris of politicians and intrigues, poisoned by the resumption of the Affair.

What emotions will Corsica give me, the fragrant and wild Corsica, from which I will ask for rest, health and oblivion?

"We are going to dance tonight," said the captain; However, the boats of the Fraissinet Company are said to be atrocious, old uncomfortable and fickle boats which hold up poorly in the sea, and I am not without concern: the Mediterranean is, this evening, particularly stormy, its short waves are shaking the entire vessel, from front to back, and, strangely swayed, the Ville-de-Bastia goes up and down the hilly hollowed out by the waves, in a frightening slide like a roller coaster; it is however sufficiently ballasted, today, the City-of-Bastia : the New Year's Day holidays were crowded with third, second and first leavers from barracks and seminaries, Alpine hunters, state sailors, fortress artillerymen, apprentice priests, college students with or without family, there are many everything on board this evening, and so much luggage! Have we waited long enough, for their boarding and stowage, in this port of La Joliette! Coming out of the piers, we were already only an hour late.

And now we no longer see the cathedral, the halyards, the yards and the chimneys of La Joliette; the Good Mother (Notre-Dame-de-la-Garde) stands alone on its limestone coast, above the Endoum district; against a limbo sky, streaked with lights and clouds, the hills of Marseille form a tragic line; the Mediterranean, a glassy blue and black, swells and runs, disassembled: one would say from the shore attacking the liner; how its blades hollow out, precipitate, violent and short? We have the wind behind us and run on the waves, the mistral pushes us, but we dance.

We do more than dance, we roll and we sway.

I am the only passenger remaining on the bridge. Sitting on a bench, my elbow on the bar, I get drunk on the physical exhilaration of movement and speed. How the vigorous momentum of the boat continues! It's oppressive, sickening and delicious, it's the unease in the void, the anesthetic exhilaration of Verlaine's ballad: Turn, good wooden horses! The City of Bastia no longer rides the swell, it rushes to attack the waves which besiege it, it is the dizziness of a race towards the abyss... The wind whips me, my hands are frozen and sweaty temples and shattered hearts; as if floating with it under the coast, with an empty head, I oscillate with the swell, I roll and I dive, embraced everywhere by a horrible delight, which is, perhaps, the dilettantism of seasickness.

But night has come: an unfortunate soldier, who until then had persisted in remaining on the other bench, opposite, has just staggered down... This string of points of fire, on the horizon, at at the foot of a bar of shadow, these are the street lamps of the Prado; the smoke from the liner rolls out, funereal, and seems to fly towards the coast: sooty and black, instead of diminishing, my hallucinated eyes see it increasing and growing, denser as it reaches the horizon; it becomes silhouettes of known hills, aspects of the shore, a dreamy Provence seems to emerge from its volutes. The landscape itself becomes smoky, a backdrop of darkness and clouds, unrolled from the funnel of the liner, and created, like a mirage, in the lividity of a winter sky. Suddenly, at the level of the blades, a large pale mass, like a shroud stretched over an enormous reef; the sea is ink-colored, the reef a funerary pale; I have the feeling that we are passing very close, we are far, however, from the island of Maïre.

Here, the anxiety of vertigo becomes so excruciating that I get up, and, staggering, holding on to the benches and the banisters so as not to fall, I reach the stairs and decide to go down... In the first class living room, the lamps oscillate, tossed odiously, women lie in piles on the benches, and we set the table!! One more effort, I find a staircase, I ask for my cabin, number 18! A waiter receives me, guides me, supports me and lays me down, fully dressed, on a bunk; he props me up with pillows, tucks me in like a child, because we drive more and more; yes, we roll and we pitch... O the emptiness of my poor head, my eyes that I can no longer open, and the agony of this heart, it seems to have come undone which comes and goes, and follows the roll of the boat, this pendulum crazy that I have there in my chest,

No one lied to me: these Compagnie Fraissinet boats are horrible, and this is not my first crossing! How many winters have already passed in Algeria, Tripoli and Tunis; I no longer count my stopovers in Malta, Naples and Palermo, my returns from Syracuse, via Livorno and Genoa, my departures for Oran, via Barcelona and Cartagena! And I never got seasick.

I have it this time. This dizziness of the stomach and meninges, this cerebral anemia, is sea sickness. You could tell me that the boat is sinking, I wouldn't move. I remain there, inert, like a dead thing, overwhelmed, unable to move, one hand in the strap of a lifebelt, hanging above my head, to hold me and not be thrown out of my way. my bunk, because we drive more and more. Squeals of crushed gravel crackle, it sounds like on the deck… it's the cry of the propeller, turning out of the water, so much the building leans, under the shock of the waves; sailors call it the pan  ; and waves of sea rush towards my porthole.

O sweet night of December 31!

Am I sleeping? Baroque visions, masks and grimaces cross my sleep. They are giant insects, beetles of human size, with human noses, fitted with enormous spectacles, beetles with eyes like the lanterns of a cab, for I read the numbers, and beetles, strapped in immense elytra of varnished cardboard; they are repulsive and grotesque; and I recognize the Châtelet parade and Landolff’s costumes; a transvestite also haunts me: a kind of Prince Charming, with a puffy and old-fashioned profile, whom I don't recognize. I also see Mrs.Ratazzi, leaning over my bunk, and, caricaturally, M. Émile Zola, and then Joseph Reinach, and even General André, in silhouettes aggravated by Forain's pencil. It is Paris that is pursuing me; Paris does not let go of me; Paris, which I am fleeing, attaches itself to my flight and leans on my patient's pillow with the terrible faces of a bad dream... Ægri somnia.

The boat stops... Stopped, the swell shakes us even more; the suffering, intolerable, awakens me completely, tears me away from the cockroaches of my half-sleep; a winter dawn pales my porthole, it is dawn. “Are we there?” What is it ? » — “Nothing, an accident with the machine,” replied the waiter, “we will arrive in two hours; time to repair the damage, we are in sight of the coast; but the sea is rough, Monsieur is tired, Monsieur should try to go back to sleep! " Two o'clock ! just three hours late! Fall back asleep ! The average, with this hell of a pitch, complicated with rolling, which tosses me around and lifts my empty stomach up to my lips! I am devastated, as if beaten up, sore, broken! I try to unbutton my fake collar which is strangling me... because I went to bed fully dressed,

"In two hours," said this boy; “we are in sight of the coast; time to repair the damage. »

This boy lied, there was no machine accident: we are in Sanguinaires, on the islands which close the bay of Ajaccio, and, if we stop like this in the swell, it is to try to save 'a passenger who has just thrown himself into the sea, a German, who, upon seeing the coast, asked: "Is this Ajaccio?" » and, at the yes of a sailor, leaned overboard and rushed into the flood; but this suicide is hidden from the other passengers, and I will only learn it during the day, on land, from the mouth of my doctor.

We no longer stop, the Ville-de-Bastia has started moving again, we are no longer even driving: a delicious, unexpected calm has followed almost instantly the sickening swaying of the swell, the tearing jerks of the pitching; we are sailing as if on a lake, we have just left the high seas to enter the bay of Ajaccio; The suicide was not recovered, not even his body.

Poor unknown dead whose soul, already escaped, struggled all night on the threshold of mystery, in the anguish of the supreme determination to be made! While I was moaning stupidly in the throes of seasickness, it was the sickness of the earth, the misery of living, which pushed him violently into the beyond and the infinite! What irreparable pain, what disappointment or what distress of soul, or even what boredom held, all that night of December 31, this man leaning over this winter sea, his elbow on the rail? And, at dawn, before the crests of the island emerging from the shadows, he hailed Life and delivered himself in Death!

Farewell, my life!

Ajaccio! Ajaccio! This time we are coming! Suddenly cured, I jump down from my berth, go up the stairs and climb onto the deck; the crisp air revives me. Ajaccio is a wall of high mountains, violent arabesques of granite, dominated by snows, one would say eternal; the silhouette of Corsica, thus appeared in the rising sun, is haughty and dark: it is like the immobile and giant prow of a monumental granite vessel: but, above the first foothills, the peaks of Monte d' Oro and Incudine shine, dazzling; an African light sets them ablaze, and, under the bright silver of their burning snow, the hills descend, deliciously blue, dimmed with fir forests, with large sections of shadow and relief, all in violet light, and that to the gulf of a silky light blue; and shores and mountains seem painted on velvet!

Like a screen of incandescent mother-of-pearl, Monte d'Oro and the peaks of Incudine dominate and fill the entire bottom of the bay with the frosty sparkle and brilliance of their crests. And to think that it was from the foot of these mountains that the enormous and formidable flight of the Imperial Eagle took off!

Napoleon's house! It is she that I ask and seek; I know that we discover it one of the first in the harbour; it forms one of the corners of the port: those green shutters, that's it! but more than its whitish facade, a detail, seen along the coast, worries and strikes me... The entire coast that we are following is lined with tombs, mausoleums and private burials; they form along the sea like an Appian Way, then, shaded by palm trees, bristling with cacti, here is the cemetery; the big hotels, the villas of winterers rise immediately after; it is before old Ajaccio, hidden behind its mole and as if set back behind Napoleon's house, the elegant and funereal city of convalescence and tuberculosis, the necropolis city of the English and those suffering from breast cancer. Menton, Corsica,

HIM !
“And when I go see the boat!” With that of Bône, let's make three goals of strolling per week! The quays, I admit, liven up a little on those days, and all of Ajaccio flocks there, from the officers of the garrison to the commissionaires of the station, to see the pretty stranger who never arrives disembark; because here I am: I have not yet met a woman worthy of being followed in your streets. What distraction will you offer me?

“Excursions, you shouldn't think about them. The snow holds the mountain; five hundred meters up everything is white, the bottom of the gulf looks like an Engadine valley, and to attempt the traditional Salario walk above the town is to risk bronchitis; as for the Punta di Pozzo di Borgo, the fifths take me thinking about it: it freezes there… In other years, a boat service allowed excursions at sea, one could, crossing the gulf, take baths in the salty air and the sun; the beaches of Isolella, Porticio and Chiavari, on the other side of the bay, formed so many harbors and stopovers. This winter, the only boat that was in service is being repaired in Marseilles, and to go to Chiavari to visit the Arab penitentiary, it takes six hours by car, that is to say, leave at dawn and return on evening, in the icy night air.

“Ah! the country is quite cheerful and I thank you for having made me come there. I am not talking to you about the evenings: it is agreed that a patient must go to bed at nine o'clock; but, during the day, what the hell do you want me to do with my days? Pay me the employment of my hours. You don't see me paying visits to the prefect! Do you see me playing tennis with the foreign colony and picking up the ball of Miss Arabella Smithson, the young consumptive Scotswoman, or carrying the racket of Mrs. Edwige Stropfer , the mistress of the Swiss boarding house, who flirts, it seems, with a native coachman and does not disdain the fishermen! Terrible, these Oberland glaciers, they become volcanoes in their old age. You don't evoke me any more rocking me for life in a rocking chair, wrapped in tartans and capped with furs, like the winnowed Englishmen and gouty Germans of this hotel; the garden is splendid, I grant you: palm trees, citron trees, mimosas and agaves with a unique panorama, the sea in the background, the town on the left and the cemetery on the right, just a stone's throw away. We are immediately taken there, but I have little taste for nursing homes, and however sunny the site may be, I will not fill this hospital garden with my cough... because your hotel is a hospital, service top-notch, but the hallways smell of creosote and the rooms smell of phenol. Each boarder, at each meal, takes his two Livonian pearls.

“Ah! Doctor, you knew what you were doing by putting me here! You kill two birds with one stone every time you visit me! I'm part of your morning tour. All that, I forgive you, and even the bland food and the eternally boiled meats, badly disguised with red sauces, and the only dessert: nuts, figs, tangerines and raisins, which I quibble in this hotel. This diet has given me back my appetite. I'm starving and my cravings made me discover this good Mrs Mille , this exquisite and dear Mrs Mille , the amiable pastry chef of the Cours Napoléon, round, talkative and so courteous, who makes such succulent terrines of blackbirds and such delicious citron compotes.

“And its myrtle liqueur!” To suck your teeth, to lick your lips! I forgive you everything in favor of this fine liquor; but please, doctor, make use of my time, fix me a timetable. »

And the doctor, while stroking with one hand… perplexes the shiny brown silk of a neat beard (a whole attitude, better than an attitude, a poem and a seduction the long, banded hand of the doctor in the curly hairs and glistening of that beard, and what indecision in the gesture with which he smoothed it), and the doctor then, while stroking the perfumed flakiness of his chin: “We have an unforeseen, quite confusing month of January, this winter. Remember that it snows in Marseille. Have you seen the Cours Napoléon depart every morning at eleven o'clock? very curious, very picturesque. You will see real Corsicans there.

“In national costume, in corduroy and with large white beards, the Bellacoscia type who held the maquis for thirty-two years, all the cartolina posta have reproduced him; I buy one every morning from the hotel porter to send to a girlfriend in France: they believe, dear creatures, that I am in danger and shiver deliciously. » — “The Bellacoscia guy, you must not do that to me, Mrs.Mille told me that they were dressed like this at the Prefecture, reflecting the tastes of foreign winterers. So I won't go to see your stagecoaches leave, I know those of Algeria, they are built on the same model… yours are even more inconvenient and smaller with their panels painted in green and dark red; one would say batches of camerera mayor to see all the travelers in mourning… And to think that Bonaparte took one of these couriers to reach Bastia via Vizzavona and Corte, when he left for Brienne… I know the couplet… There is also the pilgrimage to the Maison Bonaparte and the visit to the museum with the souvenirs of Napoleon; but I don't have the soul of Jean de Mitty every day.

England took the eagle and Austria the eaglet.
“Mr. Rostand's success has made us a little jaded, us continentals, on the saga of the historic giant. I'm surprised that you haven't yet suggested that I go to the station to watch the trains arrive; the mountaineers in vendetta, the rifle on their shoulder, barely on the platform, starting by unloading their weapon, the carrying of the loaded escopette being prohibited in town, these small local formalities sometimes organize interesting platoon fires between two trains ; but, what do you want? all this leaves me cold. I have driven too much around the world: my memories of Sicily defend me against Corsica and the picturesque finds me recalcitrant.

" Good ! here is the sun leaving us!… Farewell, light of Africa; look at the melancholy of the bay in this mist: the whole landscape is a sad, muted slate blue; Are these leaden mountains enough of exile? »

The doctor, heartbroken, said nothing more: with his nose on his plate, he ate, gently resigned to my grievances and the hotel menu; we were finishing our lunch in the dim light of the blinds of a large glazed gallery, taking refuge there, in the prudent dread of the table d'hôte; we were, moreover, the last ones left at the table, the other luncheons already spread out in the garden and basking in the sun, in a bundle of plaids, shawls and pelerines such as only the English and Germans carry around the world; consumption from across the Rhine and spleen from across the Channelneighbored there, in the thin, blue shade of the palm trees; the balled gold of the mimosas and the bloodstained thyrses of the cacti with red flowers provided the backdrop for the softened azure of the mountains and the gulf; it was the attenuated melancholy, the padded charm of a landscape for consumptive and globetrotters, exhausted from civilizations, coming to run aground in a haven of exile and somnolent agony between the olive trees, the holm oaks and the sea.

At this moment, the reappearing sun made the snow of the peaks sparkle, the gulf spread and, at the same time, cruelly accused the bile and the chlorosis of the complexions, the weariness of the eyes and the smiles, at the same time as the exhausted spinelessness of the faces. ; the garden walkers appeared slumped and winnowed, like so many tired old sleeping bags.

What had I come to do in this shed for very old travel items? I felt within me the rise of a deaf resentment, a wind of injustice stirred me up against the doctor, at the same time as a painful silence was beginning to weigh heavily.

Suddenly, the glass door of the table d'hôte opened wide... and a giant, with his strong build, his bulging stomach and his heavy face, with drooping jowls, He appeared, for it was He, not to be to be mistaken: it was his large protruding eyes and their heavy eyelids, it was his regular profile, his thick lips and his fat pleasure-seeking chin, the whole face of Augustule's medallion of decadence, redeemed by the grace of the smile and the great beauty of the gaze, for he also had from Him the limpid and thoughtful pupils, the slow gait, and even the rare flower in the buttonhole; it was Him, but rejuvenated by twenty years, Him in all the brilliance of his triumphs as a poet and author, the Him pampered, adulated, courted, whom London and New York fought over with dollars; and, as I knew he was dead, and in what misery and abandonment! the mysterious double of the portrait of Dorian Gray imposed itself, imperiously, on my memory: I risked the impoliteness of turning suddenly in my chair, to follow the frightening resemblance with my eyes longer: it was striking; Sosie was no longer Sosie; a young woman accompanied the false Oscar, elegant, and, like her companion from the Cook Agency across the Channel, with straight blond hair, long strong feet, and shoes without heels.

“The picture of Dorian Gray,” my doctor thought aloud, “we thought together.” - To believe in a ghost, is not it? What story from beyond the grave could be written about this resemblance goblin-story , as they say in London, the beautiful subject of Christmas-tale. I would have met this Englishman on board, on the night of December 31, whom I would have believed to be an intersign... Do you see yourself at night, on the deck of a liner, in the middle of the turbulent and sinister sea and, all at once suddenly, this false Oscar appearing... — Brr, Day of the Dead at Sea. It's a racial accident, strange analogies can flourish there; in any case, this fatal resemblance is very embarrassing for this Englishman. "Yes, we can believe him to be resuscitated." Do you know that you keep your promises poorly, man of few words that you are. That story of Christ and Lazarus by poor Wilde that you trumpeted, you still owe it to us, you know. "Maybe, I'll tell you then, because it is full of melancholy and fits well with this gulf and this sunny winter setting; but to tell it to you I will have neither the desired slowness of his modulated and precious diction, nor the definitive emphasis of his gesture; moreover, it is with a slight variation the very text of the Gospel. So Lazarus was dead, lowered to the tomb, and on the road to Bethany, Martha, coming to meet Jesus, had said to him crying: “Lord, if you had been here, my brother would not have died! » And once arrived at the house of the two sisters, Mary threw herself at the feet of Jesus and said to him, too: “Lord, if you had been here, my brother would not have died! » And Jesus seeing that she was weeping and that the Jews who came with her were also weeping, shuddered in his spirit and was troubled himself; then he said: “Where did you put it?” » They answered him: “Lord, come and see! » Then Jesus wept and the Jews said among themselves: “See how he loved him! » But there were some who said: “Could he not prevent his death! And Jesus trembling went to the tomb. It was a cave and it was closed with a stone that had been placed there. Jesus said, “Take away the stone! » Martha, sister of the one who had died, then said: “Lord, he already smells bad, because he has been dead four days. » But Jesus answered him: “Did I not promise you that if you had faith, you would see the glory of God! » So they removed the stone, and Jesus raising his eyes to heaven, began to pray and then, having prayed, he approached the cave and shouted with a loud voice: “Lazarus, come out! And suddenly he who was dead arose, having his hands and feet bound with bands and his face wrapped in a cloth, and Jesus said to them: “Unbind him and let him walk!” »

“But (here begins the poet's variation) Lazarus, resurrected, remained sad; instead of falling at the feet of Jesus, he stood aside with an air of reproach and, Jesus having advanced towards him: “Why have you lied to me,” said Lazarus to him, “why do you still lie in telling them about heaven and the glory of God? There is nothing in death, nothing, and he who is dead is indeed dead; I know it, coming back from there! » And Jesus, with a finger on his mouth and with an imploring look towards Lazarus, replied: I know it, do not tell them! »

CORSICA SUNDAY
We are returning from Scudo , the Scudo , the Shield , the Shield , the villa that the Pozzo di Borgo own by the sea, on the Sanguinaires road .

This Sanguinaires route is the walk adopted by the population of Ajaccio; it begins at Le Diamant , the large square esplanade overlooking the bay, the forum of the city, and runs along the entire northern shore of the gulf to the Pointe de la Parata and its Genoese tower as a sentinel, it looks like it is on the open sea: granite red of the Sanguinaires emerges, bloodied and fanciful, a few hundred meters further on.

This route des Sanguinaires is both the Promenade des Anglais and the Corniche of Ajaccio; from its roadway lined with agaves, we discover with all the blue of the gulf and the roofs of the city, the snowy peaks of Monte d'Oro; during the week, local carriages take English tourists and passing continentals there; on Sunday, the Ajaccians enjoy themselves slowly and seriously in the sun; a few taverns hold the sailors seated in front of a flask of Porticcio or other local wine and every day of the year we meet hearses there: packed upright in the legendary cart of Corsican burials, mourning natives follow, friends and relatives of the dead; because this road of the Bloodthirstyis also the road to the cemetery. Ajaccio buries its dead in the sun, and has them blessed by the wave, in the eternal greenery of oleanders and junipers: this kind of Appian Way, which I saw from the harbor, the morning of my arrival, all lined with mausoleums , chapels and funerary monuments, is precisely this Sanguinaires route where we are traveling today.

But we only come from the Scudo , a sort of Pamphili villa with an abandoned garden open to the public on Sundays, an Italian garden with African vegetation, of such a particular melancholy under the luminously cold skies of January in here ; monstrous aloes dart their yatagans of a glaucous and marbled green next to charcoal, pale mastic trees, and bluish myrtles; here are also corks, cypresses, maples and white poplars of Florence and on the blue of the gulf, enclosed like a lake in its circle of mountains, all these eternal greens, barely moved by a shift of wind, are 'a severe and sad hardness, oh! so sad !

The wail of the woodpigeons
In the hackberry trees!
Should we only come here in April? This garden of cypresses and bluish shrubs is frozen in silence: behind us the moving mantle of maquis undulating endlessly on the slopes of the hills, the open sea opens up to the horizon.

These Pozzo di Borgo, whose villa we have just visited, are the great Corsican family, enemies of the Bonapartes, the gens Corsica for centuries in rivalry with the race of Napoleon. Out of hatred for the little Ajaccio lieutenant, who had become the great emperor, a Pozzo di Borgo made himself Alexander I's ambassador to Petersburg and , in collusion with Metternich, tracked down the eagle exhausted by so many victories and demolished the imperial work. to the famous Treaty of Verona; this one, the diplomat, and the tortuous breaker of the eagles of the epic, is the glory of the family.

The castle of Punta di Borgo , which dominates Ajaccio and which one quotes like one of the marvels of the island, was built partly with whole debris of the reconstituted Tuileries; the full-length portrait of the great ancestor, of the Tsar's ambassador, sits there in the middle of the hall of honor, overwhelming with its importance and the splendor of its frame a very small portrait of the First Consul, placed next to it as if by chance, and don't diminish it in the story.

On the road, on the way back, we meet Corsicans dressed in hunting velvet and women shrouded in black, the eternal mourning that all the women of the people wear here... Proud people where the mourning of the dead lasts for ten years, some whatever degree of kinship we may have, a people who remember the benefit as well as the injury, a people who do not forget, a people who do not beg! And on our left are staggered mausoleums and on our right parades, silhouetted in black against the blue of the gulf, a whole procession of shadows, tombs and mourning! And this road is called the Sanguinaires road; in the distance the mountains fade purple, splashed here and there with a reflection of snow; a higher peak suddenly appeared in pale steel, like a dagger, in the calm air and it is, we are told,

What melancholy and how far we are here from Paris and France!

Moreover, the air is freshening, it is dusk: the landscape in the background, miraculously lit, takes on the luminously soft tones of painting on silk; light is all the magic of Corsica.

Rumors of children announce the city. A little before the first villas, a whole seminary out for a walk fell on the reefs just above the water on the shore, the road and the granite are all black with cassocks; packed together, in groups, these hairless faces, these mourning robes make so many ink stains on the mountain and on the wave and on the reef: they are the hundred and four apprentice priests of Monseigneur, the hundred and four, as they are call here.

Like a flight of “crows” from the native mass grave!
And it is a verse from Jose-Maria de Heredia which places the sinister detail of the landscape in my mind.

THE QUAYS
The quays of Marseille, cosmopolitan, traders, workers and strollers, bustle with noise, movement and sunshine; they smell of strength, wormwood and lemonade, sweat and tar, olive and musk; they rock dreams, carry adventure, laughter and tears, invite us to leave, and in drama and joy and color powder, blaze and bang: Marseille, gateway to the Orient and the Elsewhere.

The quays of Algiers, bastioned on a high terrace above the comings and goings of liners, arrivals and departures, unfold sumptuous facades of financial and maritime companies and large hotels: the hallucinated indolence of the natives leans there. , indifferent to shoppingLubins and Cooks on an excursion through the city, the opiate dream of the burnous dozes there between the haste of the Spanish colonists and the softness spread out on their seats, a flower in their mouths, of the Maltese and Sicilian carriers. The quays of Algiers, from the Square Bresson to the Place du Gouvernement, is the elegance of an Arab town transformed into a Haussmann style that has become a winter resort: the mountains of Kabylia form the backdrop and the uniforms of the garrison the figuration; the Transatlantic, three times a week, enliven the harbor and the dazzling, implausible light is, itself, theater… Algiers smells of daffodil, narcissus and ooze.

The quays of Naples, sordid, dazzling, swarming with rags and vermin, riddled with lice, with light, and splendid, sing of filth and the sweetness of life; they sing in the blue of the bay and in the blue of the sky, and, already burning with all the ardor of ancient Campania, they warm themselves at Vesuvius and warm themselves in the sun: they perfume laziness and prostitution; orange peel and easy love; it's the open-air den that crackles and blooms between the sea spray and the awful smells of the port's fritterias .

The Château de l'Œuf smells of shells, women, the tide and the bouquets of strawberries offered by the ruffians, parmezan and human seed, the mauve arabesques placed on the horizon incantation the atmosphere with magical names: Castellamare, Sorrento, Capri, the song of the Sirens has remained in echo in all the hollows of the rocks, this populous suburb is called Portici and this hill opposite, on the other side of the gulf, is called Pausilippo.

But the enchantment is the quays of Palermo: in the grandeur of a Sicilian Versailles, flanked by triumphal arches, palaces and statues, staged in terraces, in princely staircases, sprinkled with water jets, shaded gardens, they are composed like a Vernet canvas, in sumptuous decoration of rocks and heroic architecture. Mount Pellegrino advances on the horizon the fabulous spur of its promontory, the limpid gulf is called the Concha d'Oro ; during the day, half-naked kids chase each other there with tangerines, at night, under moons so intense that they seem to be electric, fishermen, a lantern in the front of their boat, fish there with tridents: the quays of Palermo are an apotheosis, a mythological apotheosis conceived in the style of the Grand Siècle. The quays of Ajaccio, sunny and sad, dream in the abandonment of a small Italian port, without movement and without transit; guarded to the west by the pier of the citadel, whose high buttresses protect the moorings of the city and the Capuchins, bounded to the east by the mole of Margonajo, which shelters the anchorage of Cannes, where the torpedo boats are stored, they These deserted and empty quays stretch out in front of the plain azure of a bay closed like a lake; the snowy peaks standing on the other bank complete the illusion: it is the horizon of the moraines and glaciers of a lake in Upper Italy, Como or Lugano: the Mediterranean has its deep and delicate blue. Not a commercial vessel, the port is empty... no yards, no masts; absent, the swarming of halyards and ropes which, seen from land, invites the nostalgic soul to embark for elsewhere. Sometimes, far away, very far away, the sail of a fishing boat or, swift and fine as the stroke of a feather on the wave, a torpedo boat in exercise, maneuvering in the harbour; sheltered from the piers, fishing boats sleep. The houses, very tall, very Italian, whitish, with green shutters, face the sea; others rise above, already cracked and leprous, houses of the old town, denouncing their misery by the rags hanging from the windows: on the ground floor, neither bars nor shops, nor taverns. Here, all commerce is dead: the Corsican, his rifle on his shoulder, watches and waits.

Against the Customs House, basking in the sun, natives weave traps, watched in silence by pensive kids; sitting, barefoot, on the warm flagstones, fishermen mend nets: their toe and second toe, supple like the fingers of a hand, hold the meshes; the indolent faction of customs officers paces the quay, without conviction, unconsciously.

Past the baths, built by Napoleon, women, squatting on the edge of the shore, beat the laundry in the water of the gulf and rinse linen which will smell of salt; here and there, groups of strollers, looking like nerds from Marseille, form a circle around the deck of three cards of the bonneteur. The breed here is very Latin: the Corsican was born a player, he plays in the café all day long, he plays there in the evening, he plays in the circle, at the refreshment bar, he plays on the esplanade of the citadel and on the harbor quays, inside and out, by candlelight and in the open air.

And at night, in the limpidity of vast lunar skies, before the solitude of motionless snow and wandering clouds, a chimerical horizon of mother-of-pearl and frost, the quays of Ajaccio are even more deserted: their sunny somnolence, during the day, fades then made worse by the cold and silence of the mountain.

To live in the mountains is to live in death! Nobody!… Hardly any lament squeaks and complains, strummed on a guitar, in some bar with closed shutters; no light denounces the place where we sing; in the old town, we don't know from where, on which floor of which house, young indigenous people waltz among themselves, to the sharp sounds of the accordion.

And I think of the distress of Alphonse Daudet's hero, the divorced husband of Rose and Ninette , prowling, at night, in the rain and snow of a winter Ajaccio... Oh! his frantic flight from the waves of sea flooding the causeway of the Quai Napoléon, and the abyss of foam from the dismounted gulf, battered by the tramontane!

O long evenings of exile, nights of Ajaccio in winter!

PILGRIMAGES
Napoleonis civitas! And, like a funerary epitaph, the inscription is engraved in gold letters on a slab of red marble, in this dining room of a monumental hotel, deafened by English chirping and German gibberish.

Nothing but people from across the Channel and from across the Rhine in this vast hall which commends itself for the glory and laurels of Napoleon! Ajaccio, the cradle of the giant of Austerlitz and Wagram, is invaded by his executioners!

Ah! this odious hotel, crowded with Deutschs and Anglo-Saxons and run by a Swiss! That's not where we'll find the Emperor's ghosts! but in the old Genoese town, in the narrow and, let's face it, unclean streets which intersect and cluster around the citadel, streets paved like those of Ventimiglia, with the tall houses, the windows decked with laundry, the pavement sometimes spanned by an arch, picturesque and dark vault where the blue of the gulf is framed here, further on the luminous dusting of some sunny place; seated at the corners of the doors, the low arched doors of the Arab stalls, women with wild eyes search there for the lice of a teeming kids; fishermen, with round, brown calves, pass by, an oar on their shoulder, proudly resting their bare feet on the flagstones; chestnuts are cooking on a stove in the open air,

Rue Létizia is the narrowest: it is in its moldy shadow that stands the Bonaparte house, a large main building on three floors, whitewashed facade, small windows with green shutters; on the other side of the street, a small garden bordered by a fence and which was that of Lætitia Ramolino completes the family home; a marble plaque with golden inscription completes the glory of the alley:

Napoleon was born in this house on August 15, 1769.

The first floor is the only one open to visitors; a granite staircase with a bronze banister leads to it. It is, in the half-light of the half-closed shutters, a succession of vast rooms still furnished in the stiff style of the time; their red tiles, their whitewashed walls and the misery of the seats, with torn and faded fabrics, still tell of the embarrassment of Mrs. Lætitia , who remained a widow with her eight children; the power and importance of the family, allied to the Bonapartes of Florence and to all the Corsican nobility, is however affirmed by the size of the reception rooms; the party room, in a gallery on a patio, doubles the twenty-six sconces of its small Italian mirrors in a parquet floor as plain as a mirror; if the furniture in Mrs.Lætitia astonish like an anachronism by the purity of their Empire style, those of the bedroom, of a pretty 18th century , seem very authentic to us. Here is the bedstead of Napoleon's mother, Nabulione Buonaparte , the armchair in which she was brought back from the church where, during the mass of the Assumption, she was seized with the pangs of childbirth. Then, everywhere, other pieces of furniture on which memories cling: dusty sofas, sedan chair of Mrs.Bonaparte Ramolino, and the only spinet that existed in Ajaccio at the time. The study, the dining room, the living rooms follow one another in a row, vast silent rooms, as if embalmed in their shadow; and the chairs, in the austere style of the time, seem to be waiting in rows, against the walls, for those who will never come back: the muffled steps of the old Ajaccian woman who serves as our cicerone alone disturbs the frozen peace of the rooms. dark and mute. And yet how many ambitions stirred between these walls, how many dreams fluttered there, and the destinies of the whole world were contained there!

In the corner of a bedroom, which is said to be that of Sub-Lieutenant de Brienne, a trap door, the one through which, in 1793, Bonaparte, the house being surrounded, escaped the pursuits of Paoli, and, on the fireplace from Madame Mère's bedroom, next to the gold laurel wreath of the First Consul, a lovely ivory nativity scene, which Bonaparte brought back from Egypt in 1790, souvenirs almost summing up the hero's sentimental career, his tenacious and violent hatred of the Englishman, his first victories and his great, unalterable love for his family, symbolized by the ivory crib and the consular laurels brought back to the birthplace and offered to the mother!

What oppressive and melancholy memories!

It is perhaps this great shadow hovering over Ajaccio which weaves like a veil of attenuated sadness on the snow of its mountains and the luminous blue of its gulf!

Corsica, grateful to Napoleon, erected statues to him everywhere, filling its squares and promenades with marble effigies of the Caesar: Cours Grandval, on this square of palm trees, shady and cool, sunny and green depending on the day and the weather. hour, and of which the Ajaccians are so proud, the toga-clad statue of the first consul dominates four granite lions, whose mouths vomit water from a fountain; on the Esplanade du Diamant, the Place de la Concorde of the city, and whose entire length commands the sea, Napoleon stands again, this time an equestrian Caesar, escorted by his four brothers, Joseph, Lucien, Louis and Jérôme, who, with their bronze silhouettes, form a guard of honor for him. It is the great commemorative monument of Ajaccio, and, sculpted in light, profiled in black against the Mediterranean azure, the five Buonapartes look at the horizon and seem to watch over the Corsican homeland as sentinels; the eye darts towards the Englishman who will come by sea. All this is indeed immortality and glory, but nowhere have I felt the great shadow quivering away as in the little house and the dark rooms of rue Létizia.

EXILE FLOWER
Every day, returning from Cazone, via the winding paths of Salario, the forest of olive trees whose silvery mounds dominate the town, I encountered them, invariably stranded on a bench, chillily taking in the sea air and the sun. , the two frail Parisians, the mother and the daughter, come there, in this Ajaccio of exile, for the health of one or the other, and bored, oh so much! in this monumental hotel for English and Germans.

They had arrived here, joyful, with the busy enthusiasm of pretty women arriving in Cannes or Nice, all delighted with the cacti in flower, the panorama of the bay, the garden and the luxury of the hotel, happy with the climate and the attenuated softness of the skies; but they quickly got over it, in the dull and heavy boredom of this cosmopolitan hotel.

To no avail, the dresses of the good maker, worn at every meal! To no avail, the daughter's embroidered batistes and the mother's evening coats, and the gilding of the oxygenated hair of this one, and the raven's wing headbands of that one; not a man in a tuxedo at the table; and all those brave Germans in cheviot costumes, all those English rogues in flannel shirts, paid no heed to those two French dolls, who had neither appetite nor flat shoes; for if the two newcomers discovered, under the lace foam of the skirts, the finest shoes and the most heady silk stockings, they did little honor to the menu of the hotel.

Taking refuge, like us, at a small table, they quibbled about everything with the tip of their forks, arguing without enthusiasm over a bite of meat in the broth of the sauces, reduced to falling back on the tangerines for dessert, without having, like us, the resource of go and have one meal out of two in some travelers' hotel in the city or some sailor's bar in the port; and I had ended up taking pity on them, these two exiled Parisians, who spoke to no one, and who, ill, and perhaps badly affected, once retired to their room, had to quench their cravings with citrons. candied and chocolate droppings.

They had tried a few car rides, but they too had had to give up any excursions, cruelly warned by the cold; impossible to venture into the mountains without feeling the coat of ice falling on your shoulders; and when we cough all our mornings!... They were therefore reduced to the Cazone, to the slow and classic walk in the sun to the cave of Napoleon, the cavern, almost of Lourdes, where Bonaparte as a teenager went to isolate himself, at the entrance of the maquis, and dream of his destiny; this cave where, pensive and melancholic, attentive to the voices of solitude, like another Bernadette, he perhaps had a vision of his future, this cave where in any case, he fell in love and became passionate, like a true islander, for this beautiful country of Corsica, whose memory haunted his whole life, and whose regret would pursue him in exile, when, Memorial of Saint Helena , he wrote: “  Corsica had a thousand charms; I detailed its broad features, the bold outline of its physical structure... Everything was better there; he was not down to the smell of the soil itself; it would have been enough for me to guess it with my eyes closed; I haven't found it anywhere.  »

But, we continentals, the pinçoute , the pointus, as the Corsicans call us, not without a slight nuance of contempt, the aromatic smell of the perfumed island is not enough for us; the shadow of Napoleon, if it makes us dream, saddens us, because the Empire was yesterday, and the yesterday of the beginning of the century compared to today!!!

So, after their daily walk in Cazone, the mother and daughter reached, with small steps, the paths of Salario, and once they reached not very high, halfway up the hill, sat down on a bench, and there, sadly, were absorbed in silence in front of the sunny gulf and the horizon of the mountains of the gulf… Italian scenery of a large lake surrounded by glaciers!

Flowers of exile forgotten in front of a nostalgic landscape.

If I had dared approach them, speak to them, I would certainly have urged them to follow me a little further, into the orchard of age-old olive trees whose shiny leaves quiver in the breeze above the hotel's over-tended beds. ; there, in a chaos of enormous gray rocks, among lentisks and arbutus flowers, a whole corner of Sicily sings between the twisted and rough trunks... with the azure of the gulf appearing in the leaves all riddled with light and similar to thin ones, ah! such thin silver medals, it is a decoration of Theocritus, a whole page of idyll evoked:

Come, an invisible flute
Sighs in the depths of the orchards,
The most peaceful song,
Is the song of the shepherds!
But how to persuade these strangers to follow me through the brushwood and the stones of the maquis! However, I spent the best hours of my stay in Corsica there, lying in the gray shade of a giant olive tree, in the warmth of the herbs and the light smell of terebinths; but these two Parisian women were also too delicately shod, I would have at least made them massacre five or six louis worth of boots!

And yet, among the grimacing rocks of the Salario, in the silver shadow of this true sacred grove, Ajaccio was no longer exile; I read there, it is true, and with delight, L' Aventureuse , by Mathilde Sérao, and Léon Daudet's Deux étreintes , two warm, vibrant and passionate works, all quivering with the southern sun in frames from Italy and from Provence. But what a familiar charm and what antique grace this orchard of olive trees also had!

Old ancestresses, looking like stregga vecchia under their black faldetta, picked up fallen olives there, while, at my feet, the city suddenly hummed with an immense noise, the joyful cries of school leaving, and that the snows of Monte d'Oro, suddenly lit up in a marvelous play of light, announced to me with the twilight that it was time to go home.

THE VOCERI
O my broad shoulders, you who had the clear waist, no one was comparable to you; you looked like a flowering branch, oh Canino, heart of your sister, they deprived it of life.

The arquebus was of no use to you, the gun was of no use to you, the dagger was of no use to you, nor the pistol, nor the blessed prayer.

Wolves against a lamb, they all came together and, when they reached the mountain, they cut your throat.

In the land of Nazza I want to plant a black thorn, so that no one from our race passes from now on; for they were neither one, nor three, nor four, but seven men to one.

At the foot of this chestnut tree I want to make my bed, since it was there, my brother, that they shot you in the chest.

I want to leave the skirt, I want to arm myself with the rifle, take the stiletto, put on the cartridge belt, I want to carry the pistol. O Canino, sister's heart, I want to make a vendetta.

And the guitars, under the touch of the fingers, squeak and complain; the voices lament, guttural and deep, already heard, one would say in the Arab cafes of the Sahel or in the cabarets of Triana. There is the chant of the muezzin in the sad monotony of this call which drags on, rises suddenly and falls; there is Spanish passion in this muted and always held note of the guitar accompaniment; but there is also something more, like a fiery and dark savagery, a savagery with fiery eyes, with the pallor of wax, like those strange women in mourning encountered daily in the hollow of the paths shaded by holm oaks on the roads of Bastia. and salary.

This evening, a family of pinçouti , continentals, invited me to come and hear Corsican lamentos and voceri sung by islanders in the language of the country; When I entered the X…, I found three guitarists, one of whom, during the day, is a hairdresser, and the other a carpenter. All three are seated on chairs at the back of the room, and it is the vocero of Canino , one of the most famous in Corsican literature, which the singers are gargling at the moment. The groans and muffled complaints of the guitars support them; they sing in a kind of Italian patois of Spanish and Arabic of which I do not understand a traitor word, but the voices are deep and warm. Ms. _X…, my hostess this evening, is kind enough to translate for me the words improvised forty years ago by the bandit Canino's sister on the very corpse of the murdered man.

The vocero of Canino is succeeded by that of Fior di Spina , Fleur d'Épine, a vocero improvised by a woman, in 1850, on the occasion of a teacher killed by a young girl from Ota, named Fleur d'Épine, whom he had seduced and refused to marry.

This morning, on the Place d'Ota, they put on you the crown woven of gold and silver, a crown according to your person after this pistol shot which resounds in Corsica.

You had the heart of a lion and the courage of a tigress when she suckles her cubs; you stretched out your arm with the pistol and discharged it on his head, saying: “Thus, infidel, you have prepared your death. »

Because love is not a joke in Corsica: word given, word kept. Or the brother, the father and the cousins ​​get involved, when it is not the fiancée herself who takes the law into her own hands; these voceri only speak of murder and death; they exalt the courage, the energy of the being who kills and, like oil on the blaze, fan the flame and foment vengeance.

The vocero is the very soul of the vendetta; it is the voice of the vocerantes which breathes the passion of blood into the hearts of men, puts the stylus in their hands and unleashes hatred and war between families and villages, villages sometimes divided into two camps and observing from one side of the street to the other, the men hiding at the windows, the rifle in one hand, the pistol in the other, this rifle and this pistol that we find every morning exposed for sale on the quays of Ajaccio, in the open air, with a wooden bed and a chair! the owner of the whole waiting buyer; the rifle, the pistol, the wood of the bed and the chair, all the Corsican furniture, the hearth and the murder, revenge and love!

Dust of the maquis! I seem to smell the harsh and reviving smell of juniper and mastic trees.

Come, take me to Tallago, where the proudest bandits are, Giaccomini and Saon Lucia; They are warriors, and with them in company I will travel the paths and the woods.

I am definitely in the country of Colomba. Mrs. X…, whose patience is tireless, wants to clarify my ignorance of precious information on the voceratrices… The Corsican woman is naturally a poet, there is like a sibyl and a prophetess in every peasant woman ; pain and the sight of death awaken the sybilline genius in them; the vocero is improvised on the corpse of the man who died a violent death, it is the call for revenge. For natural death, the improvisation is called lamento .

For the voceri as for the lamenti , the family and friends gather at the home of the deceased and stand in the largest room of the house: the dead is lying dressed on a bed, face uncovered, candles are lit while around. His widow stands at the head and behind her all the women surrounded by men. Each visitor comes, kisses the deceased, greets and takes their place among the assembly, without saying a word. Silence and mourning.

Relatives and friends once complete, one of them comes forward and, addressing the deceased, praises his life, his character and deplores his end; it is the ancient funeral oration in all its naive and touching grandeur.

Why did you leave us? Why don't you want to stay with us anymore?

The farewell finished, the speaker comes forward. In deep mourning, hooded with the black faldette, she bends over the corpse and suddenly, bursting into tears, improvises with grand gestures a kind of lament, imprinted at the same time with sweetness and violence, with sadness and of fury: it is a call to hatred and it is a cry of despair. All the women take up the last stanzas in chorus, uttering mournful ululations, these are the "hoo hoo" of the sea and the wind in the maquis. Sometimes the speaker stops; suddenly inspired, another woman replaces her and continues the vocero . The vocalistpasses from mouth to mouth, punctuated by the sinister groans of the voceratrices at the end of their breath, and in the outburst of their pain, truly drunk and possessed, they tear their hair, tear their clothes, tear their cheeks with their nails and mix their fierce imprecation with tears and blood.

At the back of the X… lounge, the guitars are still complaining; it is a Serenata that Corsican artists now sing, a love ballad.

If you want to know how much I love you, you are as much as my chest, my heart and my soul and, if I entered the paradise where the blessed are and you were not there, I would leave.

AUGUST SIXTEENTH IN AJACCIO
We missed August 15 and the feasts of the Assumption, which we celebrate here under the name of Saint-Napoleon. For the Ajaccians who remained faithful to the memory of the Ogre of Corsica, August 15 remained the anniversary of the birth of Bonaparte and the Emperor's feast day; Bonapartist banquets and toasts of delirious enthusiasm always exalt, despite the Republics, the great Napoleonic figure.

For Ajaccio, the equestrian statue of the first Consul who so proudly rides his bronze mount, escorted by his four brothers Lucien, Jérôme, Louis and Joseph undressed in the Roman style, still commands the mountain and the sea, and it is less of an effigy than a dear and tangible specter whose shadow, depending on the hour, diminishes and grows on the Place du Diamant.

Oh ! the gesture of the bronze Napoleon pointing his finger towards the horizon and still seeming to defend the gulf and the maquis against the English invasion!

But on August 15 we were still in Nice, in the suffocation of a stormy day, whose sudden shifts of wind were sure to stir up the sea. The transport service provided by the Fraissinet Company is such, in summer, that it takes eighteen hours from the port of Nice to that of Ajaccio. A three-hour stopover in Calvi or Ile Rousse lengthens a crossing already made difficult by the strong underwater currents which swirl around the coasts of Corsica. Cyrnos, indomitable and fierce, Cyrnos, inaccessible to peregrin vessels, because chasms besiege its promontories, and the entrance to its gulfs is haunted by monsters, jealous sentinels committed to guarding the lemons and delicious fruits with which its ravines abound.Thus wanders the antiquity of storytellers and philosophers on this fragrant Corsica of lentisks, cysts and terebinths, wild and fragrant maquis where the Emperors had installed the attic of Rome. It was the eastern city of the island which then supplied the heavy cargoes of cereals which went up the Tiber, on the large flat boats of Ostia; and Corsica, today walled in its rocks, for lack of a regular service which allows it the outlet of its products, Corsica doomed to poverty by the negligence of the rulers, then supplied this immense mouth open to the world: Caesar's appetite. The Mediterranean is fortunately more lenient on the Italian coast than on that of France, and the feeder fleet did not sink too often, according to the annals.

For us, these eighteen hours of crossing were eighteen hours of rolling, pitching and the most excruciating seasickness, the crewmen themselves staggered as if drunk, the personnel attached to passenger service were also sick as the passengers, and I can still see this deck of the first with all these bodies lying pell-mell in a mess of plaids and blankets and rolling with the roll under the foam and the waves of the sea; almost an equinox night, so wild and violent was the Mediterranean; and who would believe it today: the blue of an implacable sky burns above Ajaccio, the pewter-colored sea in fusion has the calm of an Italian lake and the mountains evaporated from heat, become to the horizon a luminous mist, today make Napoleon's city a Bellagio of dream and torpor, or I don't know what improbable and distant colony port; but this calm is only apparent, for the mistral is still blowing offshore and, once out of the bay, it was the heavy short waves, of a glassy blue streaked with foam, which shook us so terribly that night. and this morning.

I still have the dizziness in my head, and behind the slats of my closed shutters set on fire by the white light outside, I think I see rising and falling, in an abominable movement of roller coaster, the rocks of the coast, the swell and the railing of the Bocognano , the Company's first roller with the Ville-de-Bastia .

Fanfares, the noise of a crowd tear me from the bed where I doze; I rush to the window, I half open the shutters; A whole festive crowd crowds onto the sidewalks of Cours-Napoléon. On the terrace of the barracks, opposite, a whole stream of artillerymen jostled each other, leaned on their elbows and sought to make way for themselves, eagerly bent over the procession.

The Procession! a procession the likes of which we no longer see on the continent and which Mr. Combes will not risk suppressing again here, because the population, rooted in its customs and fundamentally Latin and devout, is above all attached to its religious manifestations, and that -là has, in fact, a very particular and very local character.

Preceded by a fanfare, a long Christ of human size appears and oscillates above the crowd at the corner of the Cours. Illuminated and painted with bleeding wounds, it advances, erected very high by a bearer in violet frocks; garlands of flowers and purple streamers frame it. A brotherhood of purple penitents escorts him; follow groups of women in black, hooded in the Corsican fashion, and men in velvet suits; then another Christ garlanded, he, with streamers and red flowers, the brotherhood around him is dressed in scarlet frocks, and the procession continues, and a third Christ appears, held very high by a bearer and followed by a brotherhood in its colors, and here is another Christ and yet another Christ in their somewhat barbaric splendor of streamers and artificial flowers. The five tortured bodies dominate, like strange masts, the tide of bare heads and hoods; it is a procession of five large Christs hovering above brotherhoods and a gathered and slow crowd. A crowd of people surrounds a statuette of a saint carried on the shoulders of a group of stretcher-bearers, it is a figurine of a monk in a homespun robe who, palm in hand, seems to bless, standing on a pile of rocks. A dozen men—muscled guys with sharp, black eyes in tanned faces—are vying for the honor of wearing it, and with strong necklines, thick hair planted low on the forehead, I make a fool of them. , men of the sea. Old chenus also lend their shoulder to the stretchers; but it is above all an ardent youth that stands around the statuette of the saint; and these five oscillating Christs, calle  ” of Zaragoza and Valencia.

— “The procession of Saint Roch, the most venerated of our saints,” my hotelier replied, “it has been four years since the procession took place. We have two Saint-Roch churches here, and each of the parishes stubbornly refused to yield to the other the honor of taking the saint for a walk. They finally reached an agreement and the joy of this crowd comes from finally contemplating in the streets their saint whom they had not seen there for four years. »

Saint Roch! His legend was told to me an hour later on the Place du Diamant by Michel Tavera, a young Corsican whom I knew a few years ago, in Paris, writing tasty and colorful literature like the mountains and who has since abandoned the Capital, preferring the smells of the rue du Bac to the wild and fragrant atmosphere of the maquis.

"Do you see those rocks over there, on the other side of the bay, opposite?"

But the shimmer of the sea, the luminous halo of the coast drowned the designated point in a haze of heat.

“Look carefully at the bottom of this promontory, you will see them taking shape, there are seven of them, they are the setto navi , the seven ships. The whole legend of Saint Roch is there, these seven rocks affirm his power. Seven Barbary galleys, laden with infidels afflicted with the plague, had entered the bay; they threatened to land in Ajaccio, the whole country was in consternation, these miscreants were going to spread their evil there. Saint Roch, implored by the populations rushing from the countryside, advanced to the edge of the sea. Kneeling and having begun to pray he begged Our Lord Christ to hinder the progress of the ships and to preserve the island, and with a gesture from the saint, the seven galleys stopped, having become petrified stones, they and their crews, changed into seven reefs.

“These are the seven reefs that spread out in a row at the foot of Chiavari, Ajaccio still celebrates today the memory of this miracle and its deliverance. »

At the bottom of the bay, the snows of Monte d'Oro, inflamed by the farewell of the sun, sparkled all pink above the bluish forests, the marching bands of the procession broke out at intervals in the district of the Citadel, the five Christs paraded on the ancient ramparts.

Napoleon's house is the perfect pilgrimage for the next day. I have already visited it, three years ago, it was during the winter and the long row of rooms on the first floor, the only floor where visitors are admitted, took on, behind the closed shutters, a lamentable aspect of distress and abandonment. In the heat of summer the impression will perhaps be quite different.

It is in the little narrow street, cool in August, cold in January, the same provincial house with three floors, white facade and green shutters. She leans back a little under her roof as if unsteady or straightened with pride. Behind the shutters, which the caretaker barely opens between, are the same rooms with slightly disjointed parquet floors, painted ceilings, in the Italian fashion, with attributes and flowers of a little dry invoice, according to the taste of the time. Seats from the time of the Revolution, cabinets from Florence inlaid with lapis and marble, Louis XVI wing chairs, whose velvet cushions lose their horsehair, furnish the solitude and it is the family living room, and is the study of Napoleon's father, the bedroom of MadameLætitia, the sofa on which she gave birth to the first Consul; because, taken during the great mass of the first sorrows and brought back in all haste from the church, they did not even have time to put her on her bed, and it was on a sofa that Lætitia Bonaparte gave birth to the great Napoleon, on August 15, 1769, around noon, as the Assumption service ended.

As three years ago, the caretaker piously opens two small cabinets hidden in the wall, one placed at the foot of Ms. Lætitia's bed , the other at the head. From the first she carefully pulls out an ivory creche representing the Holy Family in the stable at Bethlehem; the First Consul brought it back from Egypt to offer it to his mother, it is the pledge of his filial worship. The other hiding place conceals, placed on a red velvet cushion, the laurel wreath of the First Consul. It is in solid gold and it is the grateful enthusiasm of Ajaccio which paid the price with a recent subscription. The consular emblem rests under a glass globe like an ordinary pendulum; the hands of the Ajaccienne, who shows her, tremble none the less with pride.

We resume our walk, and it is random, cool and empty rooms, as if perfumed with silence and chiaroscuro, the sedan chair in which Ms.Lætitia was brought back from the church, Napoleon Bonaparte's room with the famous trapdoor through which he escaped Paoli's pursuit, and finally this pretty gallery lounge that I had loved so much on my first trip. Six windows facing the street, six others on an interior terrace make the oblong room a narrow lantern still illuminated by small wall-mounted mirrors placed between each window. A shiny parquet floor, two fireplaces at each end of the gallery facing each other, two large mirrors above and all the little mirrors on the wall lights give this little party room a false air of splendor, and yet what miserable paper on the wall and what pitiful paintings on the ceiling! But it is very much of its time, this Bonaparte family holiday salon and is already preparing the magnificence of Fontainebleau. He is stiff, elegant and conventional, like the Empire itself. The old Ajaccian, who does us the honors, points out the tiled terrace which borders the living room, MLætitia had it arranged to keep Nabulione at home  ; it was the courtyard where the Emperor played as a child. Madame Lætitia had had to decide to keep her son with her; Nabulione, turbulent, combative and dominating, organized wars and neighborhood ambushes with other kids his age which always ended in blows, bruises and even bloodshed. Imperious and determined, he put himself at the head of the little Corsicans in his street, prepared for victory and made the opposing party bite the dust; Nabulione's party was always victorious. Faced with complaints from neighbors and mothers, Ms. Lætitia had to decide to keep the unruly child with her.

Nabulione as a child was already practicing to conquer the world… Old Corsica, who tells me this legend made perhaps for pleasure, recounts it with obvious joy, all her old cracked face radiates, has a festive air. For her, as for any good Ajaccien, when we speak of the Emperor, it is always August 15, Saint-Napoleon.

UNDER THE CHESTNUT TREES
The chestnut tree, this ancestor.

Marcagi.

The chestnut is the wheat of Corsica: it feeds the whole country. Its flour replaces that of wheat; the frugality and above all the laziness of the Corsican peasant put up with it.

If the chestnut tree takes thirty years to produce, from this age onwards it provides a certain and increasingly abundant harvest from year to year. As it grows its strong branches, the chestnut multiplies bristly and green, in the glazed chiaroscuro of its leaves. The chestnut tree does not require any cultivation. While it prolongs the tangle of its roots like monstrous couplings at ground level, and, like an enormous vegetable spider, embraces with ligneous tentacles the granite of the slope and the stones of the path, the glistening chestnuts rain down from the branches. high and, lying in the shade, the indolent Corsican watches the fruit fall, and it is today's bread, and it is tomorrow's bread, and it is summer's bread, and it's the bread of winter. The little cornfield that he cultivates in his spare time, behind the paternal hovel, adds a very small contribution to the annual harvest. The chestnut is the manna of this desert of mountain peaks and rocks; what would Corsica be without its oases of nourishing chestnut groves!

The chestnut groves of Corsica! You have to see their rolling greenery rising from the bottom of the valleys to attack the mountain! They ascend the slopes, climb the heights, encircle the ridge, descend into the torrent and only stop at the already cold zone where the beeches begin, to descend precipitously into the hollow of the gorges and ravines, where their roundness leafy undulates like a sea… In their cool shade well up and chatter springs; the cold blue water, daughter of eternal snow, runs between their cracked and hoary trunks. They meet halfway up the mountain, drawn to each other, the spring descends from the heights, the chestnut grove rises from the valley, and from their meeting is born the Corsican village… The Corsican village and its old gray houses all in height and similar from afar to some abandoned stone construction site. Pierced with narrow windows, almost loopholes, they stand in the shade of the chestnut trees and the shade of the mountain, already quite high on the slopes..., in some ravine fold of which a winding road skirts the high rocks . Staggered somewhat haphazardly around an isolated bell tower, like the bell towers of Italy, the Corsican villages still dominate the valley and, contemplative at the same time as instinctively practical since they are always within reach of water and shadow, they invariably arise in front of a vast horizon. I have already said that the sobriety and laziness of the Corsican peasant find their account in chestnut flour. With incredible endurance, Fundamentally honest and honest, frugal, without even needs, but surprisingly proud and lazy, the Corsican peasant, questioned about his means of existence, has a melancholy phrase now turned into a proverb: “How do I live? he replies to the tourist, surprised at a country with almost no tillage and no cultivation. Of wood bread and stone wine! »pane di legno e vino di petra . Wood bread, chestnut flour; stone wine, rock water; and some travelers felt sorry for the sadness of this response.

There was a mistake there; the sentence is melancholy, but of the melancholy of the country itself; she has a savage pride in it. The Corsican peasant loves his poverty, he does not suffer from his condition, it is up to him to improve it. If he wanted to cultivate the land and make it return what the extraordinary richness of the soil gave here under Roman domination, he would almost be rich; but the Corsican peasant does not deign. Working the land seems unworthy of him, he leaves this lowly work to the Lucquois, and we must understand with what contempt he includes under the name of Lucquois, all the Italian laborers landed in Corsica by the boats from Bastia-Livorne, whose work is the only animation in the country. The Corsican peasant hunts, runs up the mountain, drives a few goats in front of him through the rocks, or along a steep path a donkey loaded with wood. Dressed in black velvet and gaited to the thighs, he sometimes rides a mule or a small Corsican horse, while his wife, loaded with enormous packages, a heavy jug balanced on her head, walks on foot beside him. Even more rarely, from half past four to eight o'clock, in the cool of the morning, does he water the corn in his field or the few vegetables in his garden; but most of the time with a pipe in his mouth, he dreams, seated on the little dry stone parapet of the road, or motto, leaning on the table of a cabaret, with other men dressed in velvet like him and, in the summer, he spends all his days in the chestnut grove. laden with huge parcels, a heavy jug balanced on his head, walks beside him. Even more rarely, from half past four to eight o'clock, in the cool of the morning, does he water the corn in his field or the few vegetables in his garden; but most of the time with a pipe in his mouth, he dreams, seated on the little dry stone parapet of the road, or motto, leaning on the table of a cabaret, with other men dressed in velvet like him and, in the summer, he spends all his days in the chestnut grove. laden with huge parcels, a heavy jug balanced on his head, walks beside him. Even more rarely, from half past four to eight o'clock, in the cool of the morning, does he water the corn in his field or the few vegetables in his garden; but most of the time with a pipe in his mouth, he dreams, seated on the little dry stone parapet of the road, or motto, leaning on the table of a cabaret, with other men dressed in velvet like him and, in the summer, he spends all his days in the chestnut grove.

The Arab at the foot of the palm tree, the Corsican at the foot of the chestnut tree.

Oh fresco. Cool, cool! At two o'clock, after leaving the table, the Corsican peasant, via stony, sunburnt paths, reaches the beautiful green shade. There he finds all the other men of the village, young and old. Lying down, wallowing haphazardly on rocks and roots in the soft light that rains down from the high branches, they form picturesque groups, play mora, lotto or rehash stories of bandits among themselves. A few take a siesta. Between the enormous blocks of granite, a water that is so transparent, so hallucinating, sobs or laughs on the velvet of the moss; sometimes one of the players gets up, goes to the spring and, bending down, drinks from it like an animal. Those that the continent has already refined make beds of fern to lie down, and the day passes o fresco , among the calm and the half-light, glaucous in the leafy peaks, bluish near the springs, of the Corsican chestnut grove.

In the village, already quite a distance away, the women are toiling and exhausting themselves, some on the dusty roads, their heads laden with heavy burdens, the others with the care of the household; the black pigs roam freely through the streets, and around the forno di campana , oven of the bells, the oven to bake bread, always located in the center of the village next to the campanile, hence its name oven of the bells (the oven in the open air where every Corsican village bakes its bread) — dough-kneaders (because the Corsican peasant also lets the women do the baking) pile up the loaves for the night's batch.

The Corsican chestnut grove and the beautiful laziness of its peasants. A Corsican friend is doing me the honors today. He introduces me to the inner circle of these retarded hardliners, unconscious philosophers like Lucretius, since they place above all else the joy of living the hours slowly and feeling them live. I was announced to the peasants of Ucciani, and, as they all read, or rather as they were read the day before, a recent article devoted to Ajaccio and the glory of Napoleon, I am more than expected. When I come, everyone gets up, strong tanned hands reach out to me, they make room for me, I find myself sitting on a bed of ferns, I am surrounded by white-toothed smiles and large, strangely limpid eyes. There is in the Corsican eyes, an ardor and a violence contained at the same time as a candor so eager that,

Nowhere have I met such wildly watchful eyes.

If, however, in Kabylia, in the Arab hamlets, in Kabylia as well as in all of Algeria, the woman treated as a beast of burden is exhausted from motherhood and menial tasks, while the man idles and, draped in his burnous, is absorbed in long contemplations.

As in the Kabyle hamlet, my arrival disturbed two storytellers, two Uccianais, one of whom returned from Toulon, where until a month ago he was serving in the fleet, and the other from Marseille, registered maritime freshly disembarked from a transatlantic, and both crowned with the prestige of sailors. Stopovers and crossings, mirage towns and distant strikes, I cut short the marvelous stories; all eyes, all mouths are feverishly worried about my impression of Corsica: “What a beautiful country, isn’t it, but how little known? What forests and what mountains! And the bay of Ajaccio, the coves of Piana, and the caves of Bonifacio! "Every Corsican has pride in his island and wants to impress you with admiration; his is enthusiastic, delusional, blind,

—And Bellacoscia, have you seen Bellacoscia!

Bellacoscia, whose name is Antoine Bonelli, the famous bandit who, for forty-seven years, held the maquis and shot down twenty-five to thirty gendarmes, is one of the glories of Corsica. After Napoleon and Sampierro, I do not believe that the mountain peasant has a higher veneration. Between Ajaccio and Corte, Antoine Bellacoscia is esteemed and respected as a hero. This killer of men has such a legend, he embodies in the eyes of the Corsican the spirit of independence and this love of freedom which have been put at the heart of centuries of struggle and perpetual wars against the Genoese and the Moor. Perpetually threatened on its island by the Barbary galleys or the fleets of Genoa, it has always had the mountain as its citadel and the maquis as its refuge, and banditry, in his eyes, is instinctive, extending into modern times the great figure of his heroes of ambushes and exile, defending their native land step by step against the invader. The two Bellacoscias, because they were two brothers, Antoine and Jacques, went into the maquis so as not to obey military law. Rather than allowing themselves to be enlisted as soldiers, they gained the solitude of the peaks and, for nearly half a century, lived in the open air, slept under the stars, sheltered in the den and drank from the torrent, protected and fed, moreover, by the whole complicit country, in turn saved and denounced by the peasants in admiration and also in terror of these rifles which did not miss their man. Bellacoscia! and, in the flashes of fiery pupils, I see how these impulsive souls have the wild worship of their legendary and national bandit. I saw Bellacoscia, two days before, in Bocognano where the old outlaw, pardoned by President Carnot, spends his days sitting on a chair, on the threshold of his door, with a pipe in his mouth and dressed in traditional costume black velvet.

Postcards popularized his physiognomy. Bellacoscia grew old there, revered by the entire village, surrounded by family and even part of a brotherhood of penitents. He is now seventy-seven years old. I drank and talked with him. He is a tall, white old man with a patriarch's beard; the emaciated face, with fine and hollow features, has the yellowed tones of old ivory, the eyes which remained lively must have been very beautiful. Under the large black felt hat worn by the peasant here, it is a bit like the classic head of a biblical prophet, Job or Ezekiel. Illusory conversation! Bellacoscia does not understand French, and when the band of young people who had introduced me to him with great fanfare reminded him of some of the good tricks of his former life—the story of the five gendarmes one after the other like five shooting dolls,tutti quanti , by the bandit lying quietly behind a rock so steeply inclined to the ground that one could not suspect his presence there — and the adventure of the cat wrapped in a pellone , a costume in goat hair, spun and woven by the Corsican women, who for a long time were the clothing of the mountain dwellers and which tends to disappear nowadays, and thrown down the stairs to a whole company of gendarmes in the process of invading his house; the Pandoras believing they were dealing with Bellacoscia himself, unloading their weapons on the pelloneand the two brothers then fired point-blank at the assailants—the old bandit contented himself with bending a long vulture's neck to one side, and with a wink that was both mischievous and good-natured. “Hey! hey! hey! » he said in the singing voice of the Corsican peasant; and it was almost the amused and greedy smile of a former womanizer, rejuvenated by the story of one of his former feats.

These are the hundred and one good tricks of Bellacoscia to the gendarmes that a fervent youth brings to mind, under the chestnut trees.

For all these peasants, returning from the continent or still remaining in the village, in Ucciani as in Bocognano, in Vivario as in Corte, Antoine Bellacoscia is worth a king. Of the two brothers, Jacques was the terrible bandit; he was accused of some atrocities. Jacques Bellacoscia died in the maquis, we don't even know the location of his grave, only his children know the place where his body rests. Antoine knows it too, Antoine, the survivor, but Jacques Bellacoscia made his people swear never to reveal the place. “They didn’t have me alive, they won’t have me dead!” » were his last words, his people respected his wishes, the complicit maquis kept the secret.

And of all the stories heard in the chestnut grove, this is the only story I want to remember. Mysterious and fierce, with its appearance of challenge thrown beyond death, it seems to me better than gunshots and ambushes, better than murders and treacheries, to enter the austere framework of the Corsican landscape.

THE VILLAGE
And there is a cuddly pride in the face
Made of Hellenic grace and Saracen ardor.
J.L.

“You absolutely must come to the village on a holiday. You will see our peasants a little. I showed them to you under the chestnut grove. You must see them at the rooster shoot, in their cabaret songs, their dances, and then you must not miss the exit from the church. » And as I objected to the tedious boredom of the journey in sleepy Decauville, which serves Corsica, and the journey already made so many times from Vizzavona to Ajaccio. “But go down to Bocognano by car, the road is superb. From the pass you discover the entire valley up to the gulf. I will pick you up in my station wagon in Bocognano and take you by the main road to Ucciani. You will finally know a little about the landscape. You can't see anything under this Monte d'Oro tunnel, the whole country escapes you. And then you will surprise the villages waking up and perhaps see Bellacoscia again on the threshold of its door. »Thus spoke my friend, Michel Tavera, and I allowed myself to be persuaded.

The Ucciani festival fell two days later, the annual festival, Saint Antoninus, the patron saint of the country: Il Chianco , the lame, as the Uccianese, disappointed by the August drought or the rains, inveigh against him in a very Italian devotion. of September, from which their saint was unable to preserve them.

On the morning of Saint Antoninus, we left Vizzavona.

First it was the climb at a walking pace in the green light of the fir forest, a forest rejuvenated by the night, whose resinous odors do not yet suffocate the vegetable soul of the thymes and mints, then it was the beech forest and the frieze of its fresher greenery and finally, like a wave, the great breath of pure air from the pass...

And, in an aridity of gray, ash stones, so charred are they, as one descends the bends of the road, upstream the enormous dejection, the sunny and dreary solitude of the bare masses of Monte d 'Oro, downstream the rush of white water and greenery of shady ravines; the maquis and the torrents will thus escort us to the chestnut trees of Bocognano, while to our right, on the other side of the valley with the invisible stream, so deep is it, the jagged crests of the mountain will continue to overlap on a sky of heat... and, up to the strip of luminous mists, where the outstretched finger of Tavera assigns me the place of Ajaccio, there are in a bluish powder, twelve leagues of valleys, summits, hills and gorges descending imperceptibly towards the sea, a horizon of infinite vastness and sadness, under the torpor of this already hot morning... At times, puffs of furnace burn us, the whole landscape is filled with smoke... grass fires? No ! Entire forests are burning, lit by the malevolence of the shepherds.

Since government negligence has prohibited grazing on state property in Corsica, the peasant, reduced to the maquis, simply sets fire to the confiscated wood to clear the way and find the necessary grass there next spring. to his animals.

We reach Bocognano in an atmosphere of fire.

Now it's the plain.

The suffocation has become denser and the road runs dusty between hills covered with cysts and mastic trees and corn plantations; the mountains evaporated by heat are nothing more than a luminous vibration and what solitude!!

The Saracen head of a Corsican peasant, in brown velvet and with a rifle slung over his shoulder, is the only encounter we make for fifteen kilometers. He grazes his goats armed as if for a blood feud.

A bridge. Tavera reminds me of its bold proportions.

The Ucciani bridge is a hundred years old. The Uccians, jealous of his perfection, found nothing better than to drown the architect. Once dead, he would not endow other countries with similar masterpieces: Ucciani's bridge is unique. This ferocity does not outrage Tavera.

And the road finally goes up; we climb switchbacks in blazing heat; the maquis sparkles with the sun.

In a vineyard the white cube of a tomb appears. “The village,” Tavera tells me, the funeral monument happens to be that of his family: on the slopes of a vineyard hillside the whiteness of other mausoleums shines; It’s the village. Corsica has the pride of his tomb; the entrance to any hamlet, on the plain or in the mountains, is marked by a belt of tombs. We had already found this Appian Way along the Gulf of Ajaccio.

But chestnut trees arise. Here is the station… and, by a path of goats, which is also that of the cars, climb groups of peasants. These are the black velvet costumes of bell-ringed festivals and beautiful Sundays, cavalcades of mules, peasant women in their eternal mourning dress, riding naked like men. Then there are songs and guitars.

Ajaccio and the surrounding area cheerfully attack Ucciani.

And among this tanned crowd, with sharp, black eyes, there is the surprise of adorable blonde faces. The Corsican blonde is particularly desirable. Nowhere have I seen those rusty golds tinged with dead leaves in the hair, nowhere those aquamarine eyes in faces bronzed and ripened by the sun. Blond Corsica has the flavor of a fruit.

There are also theories of women, their waists straight or swaying under enormous loads, pairs of donkeys and riders held behind by other riders on small country horses.

A stampede of swine, flocks of half-naked children, young girls grouped around a fountain, this is the street.

Worn away by years and sun, the houses of Ucciani are the color of tin; an immense chestnut grove dominates them. Highlighted on this fresh greenery, the houses of Ucciani descend in disorder to meet the walker, followed in the valley by the shade of the forest.

A whole group of players point out the inn. Lottery holders and fortune tellers are there, enticing the mountaineer, all coming from the city. Here is the bell tower, square and straight, isolated in the middle of the village, while the church below nestles at the foot of an embankment. Already all this scattered joy expands us and rejuvenates us when, like a howl of an orphan, rises and cries a mournful chant. An immense wail drags, wails and yelps. It is the troop of mourners getting angry around a corpse in the rehashing of voceri . There is a dead woman in the village.

A woman died there during the night.

The whole family (all Corsicans are related to each other) is there, behind the closed shutters of the house, screaming and feasting while watching over the body. Mourning has spread across the country. There will be no cock shooting, no dancing, no celebrations in the street, there is a dead woman in Ucciani. The celebration will be limited to the high mass and the procession.

The great mass. Impossible to enter the church, the crowd, packed so as not to throw a pin, flows back, pushed back outside. Around twenty women pray under the gate, kneeling on the steps. Above their silk scarves, we can barely make out a sea of ​​hooded heads, and, in the chiaroscuro of the high altar dotted with candles, the slow comings and goings of a clergy weighed down with gold chasubles. All the women have carefully hidden their hair, an adoring fervor bends them towards the altar, deep songs trail in chants. It has the atmosphere of a Spanish sanctuary, but the surroundings of the church are those of a Brittany pardon.

Lying down, sitting on the side of the shadow, all the men are there, especially the boys, who have come to see the girls after mass. They chat among themselves under wide-brimmed felt, in heavy iron-shod shoes, sticks in hand, and patiently wait for the women to pass by. A few strum guitars. The stone parapet, which dominates the ravine, was respectfully left to the old men. A whole bunch of old people, very Bellacoscia in appearance, are enjoying the cool there; one of them is ninety-two years old, and the father of twelve children, he is there with five of his sons, the youngest of whom is twenty years old and the eldest sixty-six. This is to tell you the Corsican greenness. True sons of different women. This amazing generator has had four. I look at him in amazement.

And the crowd flows. We leave Mass. Passers-by and townspeople come back to the village, a gathered crowd, still keeping, even outside, the religious silence of the church. “The population here is so religious, so passionate above all! Tavera confides in me. Do you believe that in Holy Week, while the Gospel of the Passion is being read, as the Jews pass by, when Pontius Pilate washes his hands and delivers Jesus to Caiaphas, all the men scream, blow into horns of ox, demolish the benches with blows of stick. And it is a din of boos and appalling insults addressed to the executioners of Christ. Spaniards, or rather Arabs, with all the sensual and demonstrative fanaticism of the African races. Decidedly the Corsican is much more Arab than Italian.

We are now having lunch in a Corsican house. An old stately home that has not left the family for two centuries. The Taveras live there from father to son, the ancestors died there, the grandsons will die there, the Taveras of the future are still to be born there.

Vast rooms, with slightly low ceilings, with exposed beams, small windows opening onto the village, some onto the mountain, and where service is carried out by a line of ancient servants. The servants form a family there alongside that of the masters. The pretty girl who serves us at the table is the great-granddaughter of the old maid who raised Michel Tavera's mother. She entered the house at nine years old, she never left it. She lived there, married there, had twenty-five children and grandchildren; she lives retired, now, in the Tavera house in Ajaccio, a servant-grandmother, still green and hoary under the snow of her eighty-six years: seventy-seven years of service, different times, other morals! You have to come to Corsica to still find such shows.

A final trait which will fix the patriarchal morals of the race.

In the immense kitchen, which is separated by five steps from the dining room, there are today twenty people at the table, the sons, daughters and grandchildren of the servant-grandmother, all from Ajaccio, celebrating the country celebration. The Taveras treat them magnificently and serve them the same meal we eat at the dining room. There are sailors from the Fraissinet Company there, a shepherd, a blacksmith, even a mason, all the trades.

All these brave people left Ajaccio at one o'clock in the morning, stacked on a one-horse cart lent to them by the master, all night they walked in step on the roads singing: they arrived at dawn at the village. They will leave at dusk.

Through the open windows, behind the closed shutters, the voices of the mourners, the lamentable funeral song of the dead, penetrate with scents of myrtle and the sun.

SOME BANDITS
We were coming out of the Renaissance, my friend Cantarelli and I. Orso Cantarelli is a Corsican from Ajaccio more than equipped by ten years of living in Paris and as widespread in politics as in literature; the success of the Adversary was reflected in his eyes, Corsican solidarity reached the intensity and strength of Freemasonry, and that evening, still vibrating from the final scene between Guitry and Brandes, Orso Cantarelli triumphed in Emmanuel Arène. I felt the desire to dampen this enthusiasm.

—Ah! these Corsicans, I said to him, installing him in front of a dozen natives , what admirable conquerors, born for intrigue and adventure, and what gifts of seduction! They are the last conquistadors or condottieri . See, this century belongs to Corsica: Napoleon conquered Europe and Emmanuel Arène has just tamed Paris. And forcing irony to exasperate the legendary pride of the race: First of all, you are a country of bandits.

Cantarelli shrugged his shoulders.

— Do you still believe that we have kept the cult of bandits? What a writer you are! Arene's success bothers you, anyone would bother you, but really you've wasted your time for the past two months, this summer in Corsica, and you still believe in our enthusiasm for these unfortunate exiles. It's a pity and a bluff. Listen to me, I am a good prince:

“Our bandits! You have, like all continentals, fallen into the trap of decor. The bandits ! It is the setting of mountains and forests that idealizes them, the distance too, because they are so far from you in race and habits! Finally, most of them benefit in your eyes from the hindsight of time. Dead or retired in the small villages of the heart of Corsica, they appear to you, in the peasants' stories, like heroes of the legend; they are the distant princes of the maquis. If you are shown a patriarch like Antoine Bellacoscia, shrouded in white hair, grandchildren and memories, and, full of romanticism as you are, you take him for a character from the Bible. And Orso Cantarelli enveloped me in the mockery of his clear eyes; then, while drawing a puff of smoke from a large cigar of his country:

“We must therefore respond to your enthusiasm, dear friend, and above all not propagate this opinion, that we all have the admiration of our bandits. It is with these stories that you give us the reputation of savages, and our island ends up passing for a lair. I know very well that this proven banditry earns us, in winter, the clientele of sentimental Germans and old English misses , but believe me that we would much prefer French winterers; but all are confined to the Riviera. Apart from Nice, Cannes and Monte-Carlo, no salvation for a Parisian! But back to our bandits, some are real scoundrels; I'll judge you:

“In 1889, a man named Rochini joined the maquis and held it for fifteen years, terrorizing the whole country, from Propriano to Sartène; do you know what Rochini had done? In love with a peasant woman from his village and rejected by her (the girl had a fiancé), Rochini declared to the unfortunate woman that he would kill them, her and the man of her choice, if she did not agree to follow him and 'marry. The girl, like a true Corsican who only has one word, laughed in Rochini's face. The latter went to wait for her at the fountain—the fountain where the whole Corsican village meets, talks and converses—managed to find her there alone, once again put her on notice to choose between him. and her fiancé and, when she refused, stunned her with a shot from the butt of a rifle and cut off her breasts. Two days after, the miserable girl's fiancé received two bullets in the head. An Apache from Belleville could not have done better. Thereupon Rochini took the maquis and held it for fifteen years. So ! Don't you find such a character very interesting?

“Besides, we must not believe that the village and the mountain hold their bandits in great esteem. They endure them, terrorized by the ever-threatening reprisals of these “  outlaws  ”. The Corsican peasant hates the gendarme, but is even more afraid of the bandit. Once he has reached the maquis, the bandit establishes himself as a kind of persona sacra. At the same time as he arrogates to himself the right to shoot anyone wearing a uniform, he levies the tithe on the peasant, he settles down at his hearth, sits down at his table, demands the supper and lodging and, sometimes, his host's wife. With that, horribly suspicious (because his misdeeds have put a price on his head and in this poor country, the always high enough bounty can tempt consciences) the bandit, always on the eye, fears ambush, surprise and betrayal ; he enters the peasant's house at gunpoint and demands, at mealtimes, that his guest taste all the dishes before him. This complicity, supported like a yoke, inevitably leads to sudden revolts; by killing or handing over the bandit, the peasant then takes revenge for the annoyances suffered, and this is the death of Feretti, the bandit of Propriano.

“Pursued by the gendarmes, he had taken refuge with a relative of his, who lived in a fairly isolated hovel in the mountains. He had settled there as if he were at home, ruled there like a master, putting his hand to the dishes and even to the bodices of the girls. He had made that of his host, his mistress, the father, tamed by terror, dared nothing against the miscreant. Feretti, full of just distrust for the man he terrorized, made him eat, before and in front of him, all the dishes that were served to him. The peasant had a brilliant idea: he found a way to introduce strychnine into fresh figs, he delicately cut off the tails. The poisoned fruits were mingled with others, intact: "Eat," Peretti said to his relative. The peasant complied. He recognized the figs. Reassured, the bandit dipped from the plate. At the fourth fig he fell struck down; the peasant had freed himself from his oppressor.

“Sometimes it's the greed that decides the death of the bandit. The bounty has tempted the peasant, and in this case it is almost always a relative of the bandit or one of his guides who does the trick, because the bandit only walks preceded or escorted by a guide and, sometimes, of several, who do around him a real avant-garde service. They explored the country, ensured the safety of the village where the outlaw had to pass, prepared his lodgings and encouraged his escape in the event of an alert. Like the Chouans of Vendée, they have among themselves signs known only to them; three stones placed on the side of the road, at the entrance to a village, warn the bandit not to go any further, the place is not safe for him; such and such a cut in a chestnut tree trunk means that the gendarmes are going to pass by and that it must fork as quickly as possible to the right or to the left so as not to fall into their hands; and throughout the country, the tree and the rock become accomplices to protect and save the bandit... deceptions; this was the case of one of Jacques Bellacoscia's nephews.

“He had dreamed of winning the big sum for a long time. The death of his terrible uncle alone could provide it to him; but, besides the fact that Jacques Bellacoscia was not easy to surprise, even by one of his own, this interested nephew feared reprisals from the family. Antoine Bellacoscia was not a man to let his brother's murder go unpunished, and then all the Bonellis would have taken up arms, so all the Bellacoscias were in the maquis.

“This madré nephew decided on a less close bandit, a bandit who was not family.

“A man named Capa then held the mountain between Vivario and Vizzavona, he was a fine sleuth who had always outwitted the steps and risers of the constabulary and whose head, charged with misdeeds, was dearly priced. Bellacoscia's nephew therefore fell back on Capa, but Capa was not the man to allow himself to be approached and slaughtered like common game. After three months of chases and ambushes, the unfortunate bounty runner had to give up killing the famous bandit, but he did not give up the money.

“In the legitimate apprehension of Capa's rifle and bullets, he decided on a substitution; the trick was to obtain a corpse and provide it to the gendarmerie like that of a bandit. An unfortunate beggar carrying holy images, an old pellegrine, as they are called here, was stalked and murdered by the peasant in a forest path. Corsica is infested with these old saint-showers, most of them Italian by birth and who, ragged and hoary, go from village to village to have the peasants kiss the figure of copper or embossed tin, which they wear religiously. hanging around their necks. They are defenseless, without family too, and their murder is easy. A forest crossroads lives crime. Once the man was shot, the assassin hastened to disfigure him, burning his beard and face with powder. The corpse thus rendered unrecognizable, the bounty hunter ran to notify the gendarmerie, brought them to the scene, and made them recognize the dead man.

“—It’s Capa, I watched for him, followed him and then I killed him! I aimed well, see rather, at the head.

“The mystified constabulary fell into the trap, a report noted the death of the famous Capa, the murderer received the bonus and would still live happily on chestnut polenta in winter and corn polenta in summer, if Capa, furious at being thought to be died during his lifetime, had not claimed.

“He wrote to the prefect, to the public prosecutor, even to the editors of newspapers, to deny his death and to establish clearly that he was alive; he stirred around the deception, which removed him from the number of Corsicans, public opinion and the press. The assassin of the false Capa was arrested, an investigation was opened which proved his crime, the identity of the poor pellegrine was found and the Corsican bounty lover went to the Court of Assizes and paid for his substitution of a corpse with his head.

“He was guillotined in Bastia,

"The affair and the death of the famous bandit Poli, his meeting and his disputes with the prefect of Ajaccio in the forest of Aïtone, the prefect's victoria arrested with his official escort by Poli and his guides, and the conditions of the bandit imposed on the ministerial officer lying at gunpoint throughout the interview, all this detached adventure, one would say of Offenbach's Brigands , has too recently defrayed opinion and the press to return to it. Poli, a true brigand much more than a bandit, had gone to find his uncle Lecca and tried to ransom him under threat of death.

“Received with gunshots by Lecca, Poli had sworn revenge and, some time later, in fact, Lecca had been found killed. Poli had then gone to the underground. Arrested, then condemned by the Court of Bastia, he was sent to New Caledonia. He had managed to escape, had taken refuge in Italy and, imprisoned in Rome as an anarchist, had always hidden his identity and his name there. In Corsica, he was believed to be dead.

“The arrest of his two brothers, involved in the assassination of Lecca and imprisoned as accomplices, brought him back to the country. Upon learning that his brothers were compromised because of him and through him, Poli, braving all dangers, returned to Corsica. He asserted his presence there through murders, violence and plunder, put the country in a regulated division and from brigandage to brigandage, from daring to daring arrested the victoria of the prefect and put the latter on notice to have his brothers acquitted, then on the bench of the Bastia Assizes: “  They were innocent, he alone was guilty and took pride in proclaiming it. » “The prefect promised everything the bandit demanded: Poli's brothers left the Assizes acquitted, but the news of the murderer's return to Corsica had brought back the sons of Lecca, the murdered uncle. To avenge their father, the three Lecca sons, one a railway employee on the continent, the other a non-commissioned officer in Tunisia and the third established in Bône, in Algeria, obtained leave, went free and, returned to the island, the maquis gained there.

“They organized the bandit hunt there. Pursued by his cousins, tracked by the gendarmes, Poli was picked up one morning in the forest, dead in his turn. One of his guides had poisoned him to receive the bonus.

“For a Corsican vendetta , here is one which, in my opinion, is well worth that of Colomba and could tempt a modern Mérimée, and Poli was killed barely six months ago.

“The legendary exploits of the two Bellacoscias become very pale in the hindsight of time compared to the lukewarm and freshly shed blood of the Lecca-Poli feud, and then Antoine Bellacoscia has lost much of his prestige since the authorities of the island classified as a decorative bandit in official celebrations! During Mr. Lockroy's last trip to Corsica, did not an overzealous administration have the idea of ​​camping old Bellacoscia in bandit costume on the awful concrete cooler which disgraces the Vizzavona station, and to group around him about twenty old peasants clad in skins and dressed in black velvet, a whole collection of bandits for the occasion who, when the unfortunate Lockroy got off the train, greeted His Excellency with a sudden volley of fire.

"Heroic shootout of the Navarrese almost!!

“M. Carré could not have done better. Local color and histrionics.

“The then prefect had served bandits to the minister, the bandits took revenge on the prefects in Poli.

“A word from Bellacoscia to finish, from old Antoine Bellacoscia, the same one who has been somewhat demonetized by cartolines and official celebrations. It gives off a wild smell of gunpowder and maquis.

“We were talking in the village about the new uniform of the gendarmes, Bellacoscia was present and, as we consulted his opinion, the old man, winking at the gilded copper grenade, which puts a brilliant point above the visor of the today's shako: Che bella mira! was he content to say! What a beautiful focal point! and in his voice trembled like regret.

CONTENTS
From Marseilles to Ajaccio	
5
Him !	
19
Corsican Sunday	
32
The Quays	
38
Pilgrimages	
45
exile flowers	
52
The Voceri	
59
August sixteenth in Ajaccio	
67
Under the Chestnut Trees	
81
The village	
95
Some Bandits	
107
Mayenne, Printing Ch. COLIN .

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HOURS OF CORSICA ***
Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will be renamed.
Creating the works from print editions not protected by US copyright law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very easy. You can use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected by US copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.
START: FULL LICENSE
THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK
To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at www.gutenberg.org/license.
Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.
1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.
1 C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the United States and you are located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work.
1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any country other than the United States.
1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:
1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or distributed:
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org . If you are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from texts not protected by US copyright law (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in the United States without any fees or charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™ trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted with permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.
1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg™ License.
1.E.6. You can convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form . Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.
1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that:
• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”
• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.
• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of receipt of the work .
• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of the Project Gutenberg ™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.
1.F.andy and angela and andy andy
1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread works not protected by US copyright law in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.
1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg ™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may request a refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.
1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.
1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any Defect you cause.
Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™
Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks of life.
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™'s goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.
Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit 501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by US federal laws and your state's laws.
The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact
Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate .
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us with offers to donate.
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the United States. US laws alone swamp our small staff.
Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.
Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.
Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in the US unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.
Most people start at our website which has the main PG search facility: www.gutenberg.org .
This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™, including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.